Objective: A comprehensive ergonomics study on Spatial Disorientation (SD) in aviation was performed to demonstrate that a generalized SD perception dataset, measuring perceptual joystick response in different vestibular stimulation contexts, can be created using motion detection experimental methods.  Machine learning modeling (ML) recommendations for predicting SD were established, such that SD researchers can directly apply these modeling techniques to real flight data.

Background: In aeronautics, SD includes situations in which the aviator fails to perceive correctly aircraft attitude, position or motion. SD is often quantified in terms of task and accident context, making it difficult to develop a generalized and fundamental understanding of the occurrence of SD and viable solutions.

Method: Using existing motion detection experimental design methodologies, a vestibular whole-body rotational and translational compensatory tracking task was employed to investigate SD perceptual joystick response in a naturalistic flight context.  A generalized SD dataset was created from these experiments, where upon five combinations of key ML modeling parameters were evaluated using prediction accuracy and ROC-AUC; modeling parameters included number of features, eight model types, dataset conditions, feature type, and semi-supervised label type.

Results: The perceptual SD dataset was statistically proven to be representative of human motion detection behavior in aviation.  Thus, the simulation environment coupled with motion detection experimental methods was sufficient to generate realistic piloting responses. ML modeling comparison analysis demonstrated that SD can be predicted using joystick motion derived features and give detailed recommendations for the five key ML modeling parameters. Specifically, the number of features per model did not influence model prediction, implying that a single joystick derived feature is sufficient to predict SD.  Moreover, decision tree models produced more accurate SD prediction models than other optimization based models when using simple joystick motion features.  Specialized models per experimental condition did not outperform models where all the data was used for decision tree models.  However, for optimization based models some specialized models predicted better than models in which all the data was used, implying that lower data variability is important for SD prediction using optimization based models.  Feature importance analysis revealed that decision tree models perform best using constant natural frequency features, and optimization based model feature importance identified more temporal features as being important than constant natural frequency features.  Thus, if a simple and stationary SD model is needed, that relies on modal patterns, decision tree models using simplistic joystick derived features are sufficient.  However, if a more complex time dependent SD model is needed, that relies on data trends, optimization based models using more complex joystick derived features are an ideal option.  Binary semi-supervised SD label construction resulted in better predicting models than multi-label construction, in particular the binary label that defined SD by overall correctness produced more accurate prediction models than the label based on initial correctness.  Thus, it is best to define some performance mistakes as non-SD and major performance mistakes as SD; this result confirms the existing definition of SD.

Conclusion: Perceived motion disorientation can be quantified and predicted based on task relevant behavior (e.g., joystick).

Application: These measures can be used to monitor the occurrence of SD, thus understanding the cause, and evaluate the effectiveness of SD solutions. 

Keywords: aviation, spatial disorientation, vestibular, perception, joystick, machine learning.

Précis:  A comprehensive ergonomics study on Spatial Disorientation (SD) in aviation, that simulated SD in a naturalistic piloting context and predicted the occurrence of SD using perceptual joystick responses; motion detection experimental design methodologies and machine learning techniques were used. 