% Summary of study 
In this comprehensive study about Spataial Disorientation, we demonstrate that it is possible to measure perceptual SD while isolating and simulating realistic aspects of a vestibular feedback piloting task, and then predict the occurrence of SD using Machine Learning techniques where the perceptual joystick SD measure can be transformed into descriptive features.


% Dataset creation
The experimental design allowed for the collection of perceputal response joystick data during various basic senarios of vestibular and propreociptive stimulation, such that depending on the joystick response SD or non-SD was apparent.  A crucial data standardization step was used to verify that the simulator system performed the experimental design correctly, removing trials with delays and rapid erroneous motion.  This SD-targeted dataset captures known human motion perception trends, demonstrating that the dataset reliably captures motion detection behavior.  Known motion detection trends include : a) accurate and faster response for supra speed stimulation in comparison to sub-threshold speed stimulation, b) Pitch, Roll, Yaw and UD, LR, FB were the least to most difficult rotational and translational axes tasks respectively, c) longer reaction times corresponded with task difficulty.  Our dataset contains two additional effects, due to the task design, that are not found in controlled experimental motion dection datasets.  The first effect is that translational dectection was not significantly more difficult than rotational detection.  It is suspected that rotational and translation motion detection difficulty was similar because participants were not constrained to the simulation apparatus.  Self-generated motion cues could have assisted in motion detection for translational stimuli.  Previous studies shown that rotational motion detection is more accurate than translational motion detection, when the head and body are fixed (citation). The second effect is the increased task difficulty, statistical analysis showed that regardless of experimental conditions the best performerss achieved 76% detection accuracy and average performers achieved 51% accuracy.  The task may have been difficult because participants were given the freedom to decide on which axis and in what direction the stimulation occured, as is done in a real-life piloting situation.  All participants had very little to no piloting experience, thus our results reflect human motion perception without the influence of piloting experience or training.  The modeling results obtained from this dataset are likely to be less accurate at predicting SD in comparison to creating models using expert piloting responses,  because our novice participant response's have more variability than expert piloting responses.


% A comparison of ML model parameters 
Using the SD dataset we investigated modeling methods to predict SD, including statistical analysis, predictive control, and machine learning.  ML methods have been proven to be extremely efficient and accurate, using large quantities of data, at finding patterns amongst different types of data and constructing resuseable model structures for future prediction (Vemuri, 2020).  Using ML techniques, we investigated how to optimally predict SD and explain the importance of different parameter selections.  We evaluated the importance of model construction parameters by using test set prediction accuracy and ROC-AUC as a benchmark and comparative measure.  Five key model construction parameters were tested: number of features, 8 model types, dataset conditions, feature type, semi-supervised label type.

Regarding the number of features in each ML model, no significant difference were found in prediction accuracy when using all six joystick features, three of the most important features, two of the most important features, or the most important feature alone. Thus, building a model on a single important feature is sufficient to predict SD.  However, it is a best practice to use all relavant features for model construction.

Decision tree type models (DT, GBC, RF) were superior, to optimization based models (SGD, LDA, MLP, GNB, NuSVC), in test accuracy prediction regardless of the experiment (rot, trans), axis, speed, and semi-supervised label.  On average decision tree models had accuracy rates ranging from 0.8-0.99 depending on the model type.  These models were able to learn associations between the features and the label regardless of semi-supervised label construction.  However, optimization based models predicted best when labels were constructed with a binary label.  More specifically, the lenient label resulted in better prediction than the strict label.  On average optimization based models with binary labels had accuracy rates ranging from 0.5-0.85.  Models using all of the data instead of a subset of the data, provided similarly accurate performing models. Therefore in order to predict SD in a specific circumstance, like roll, one can use data from any axis or speed context and SD will be accurately predicted for a specific context.

Three main findings were identified during feature importance investigation: 1) decision tree models perform best using constant natural frequency features, 2) optimization based model feature importance identified more temporal features as being important than constant natural frequency features, 3) semi-supervised labels did not influence feature importance for decision tree models however the strict label for optimization based models identified only temporal features as being important.  When an ML model performes poorly or does not select a feature as being important, it means that the optimization strategy can not produce a prediction in alignment with the label, using the given feature information.  Optimization based model poorly use features with repeating constant values because the optimization stragies often require feature data point distances to be optimized in a certain manner. Feature data points with the same value do not allow for the optimization algorithms to find optimal maximization or minimization predictions.  In hindsight, instead of using constant natural frequency features it would be more beneficial for optimization methods, to create a more complex natural frequency feature using wavelets or a feature created from a clustering method like kmeans.    

Finally, the decision to choose a strict or complex label convention versus a lenient label to discern SD depends on the application and the quantity of data available to represent a non-SD state.  The strict label is less realistically represenative of non-SD, because perfect behavioral data in any task is statistically rare, thus building an accurate model using a strict label convention maybe more challenging. Similarly, for the complex semi-supervised label there is lack of represntative data for each of the SD cases, overfitting (training predictions are higher than test predictions) is observed for both strict and complex labels supporting a lack of data for these labeling conventions.  The lenient label, labeling with respect to overall correctness regardless if mistakes are made, was shown to be the best labeling convention as: 1) overfitting is not observed for our small dataset (test and training predictions are similar), 2) both natural frequency and temporal features are selected as important features thus a diversity of simple patterns are captured, 3) both decision tree and optimization based models reasonably predict the test data.

% Correlation of physical and perceptual disorientation
One-third of participants felt physical disorientation during the task, however no significant relationship between physical disorientation and motion detection was found.  There was a trend where participants who initially detected unsuccessfully felt worst after the experiment than participants who did initially detected successfully or did not try.  More sample points regarding physical disorientation are needed during the experiment, instead of a sample before and after the task, in order to determine if physical disorientation is correlated with motion detection.  Based on our results, questionnarie methods for ascertaining information about physical disorientation are insufficent to uncover correlations with perceptual disorientation.  A physiological sampling measure that implies physical discomfort, with a comparable sampling rate as the joystick such as EEG, NIRS, heart rate, or electrodermal activity (sweating), could provide more insight into correlations with physical and perceptual disorientation.
