-----------------
1 Introduction
-----------------

% 1) What is SD in aviation?, Problems --> accidents, Treatment --> education, Problem --> lack of a general framework for identifying and treating SD

SD, in aviation, is the failure to perceive orientation, position, or movement. It is caused by multiple factors including environmental references and conditions, experience, and stress.  There are diverse types of SD symptoms, ranging from confusion to physical sickness, and currently there is no proven method or solution to prevent it (Bles, 2008; Gibb et al, 2010; Perdriel, 1980; Previc et al, 2004; Newman, 2007).  International studies on the frequency and severity of SD accidents show that the cause of 6-32% of major accidents are due to SD, similarly 15-26% of fatal accidents are a result of SD (Newman, 2007).  Recovery from SD is strongly connected to the pilot's awareness of the situation, and his/her ability to perform corrective control, despite the disorientation, to maintain aerodynamic stability; 80% and 20% of SD incidents are caused by unrecognized and recognized situations respectively (Bles, 2008).  Currently, SD is treated by educating pilots of the signs and symptoms of SD, and instructing them to fly below the physiological thresholds of the human vestibular system.  Treating SD has been challenging because SD is often defined with respect to a specific aeronautical context. SD definitions focus on flight performance errors but seldom include context independent behavior, perceptual, or physiological trends.  Due to the fact that SD is studied case-by-case in an aeronautical context, there is little general understanding of the onset of SD and orientation, position, or movement perception with respect to environmental references.  It would be of interest to study SD using a motion detection experimental paradigm, measuring SD in a general context with respect to whole-body orientation, position, speed, and perceptual feedback.  And, ultimately outlining a general framework for modeling and predicting the occurence of SD based on perceptual feedback.



% 2) Motion detection experimentation :  What is motion detection? - how is motion detection studied? - how can the study of SD use existing finding from motion detection research?

Vibrations or motion, measured by the human vestibular system, contain important information about the environment and our orientation and position with respect to the environment.  Motion detection is the act of discerning self-motion with respect to a reference in the environment (citation).  Human motion detection and perception is quantified, by stimulating the vestibular system systematically, via different vibrational and motion experimental paradigms (Angelaki et al, 2008). Initially, motion detection was quantified by observing at which directions and speeds, angular and linear, humans could perceive self-motion.  The observed values where humans cound not perceive correct self-motion, called vestibular thresholds, were used as an indicator to be aware of SD.  Experimental paradigms included the usage of different experimental conditions such as, acceleration amplitude, trajectory of stimuli, sequence and exposure time of movement and non-movement events, movement direction with respect to the orientation of the head, whole-body stimulation (Young et al, 1966; Guedry et al, 1974; Melvill et al, 1978; Benson et al,1986; Benson et al, 1989).  Recent motion perception research has adopted robotic simulation tools and standardized experimental paradigms, including a greater range of motion test frequencies, allowing for more precise and consistent motion detection boundaries for a large variety of perceptual situations.  Additionally, vestibular motion perception studies investigate context-driven parameters, such as: 1) stimuli direction and rate, 2) continuous vs non-continuous stimuli, 3) pilot control vs non-control with respect to stimuli, 4) orientation and/or movement of the pilot's body during exposure to stimuli.  Depending on the context parameters and the stimuli trajectory, the vestibular-proprioceptive system detects motion differently and thus behavioral responses are different (Haburcakova et al, 2012; Soyka et al, 2011; Bermudez Rey et al, 2016; Karmali et al, 2017; Valko et al, 2012; Hartmann et al, 2014).  Despite the identification of various perceptual boundaries in previous works, it remains uncertain how to reliably use thresholds to assist with SD in a functional aviation context.   For example, in many of the previous works participants are fixed to a chair or apparatus, preventing natural head and body movement, because head and body motion influence motion perception.  Static-state motion detection behavior is not equivalent to behavioral responses in a dynamic situation.  In flight, pilots are constantly in motion at different body orientations that could allow for differences in perceived orientation, position, and motion with respect to references, perhaps leading to SD.  



% 3) SD research using motion perception experimentation or modeling

In an online flight context, it is more accurate to predict states of disorientation from modeled physiological or movement signatures than using vestibular thresholds.  Thus, instead of applying perceptual threshold values from motion detection research to SD research, as was done in the past within aviation, SD researchers are beginning to conduct motion detection experiments using realistic flight scenarios.  For instance, directional perception was investigated in a realistic helicopter task where participants were asked to point towards the sky to demonstrate a non-SD state (Cheung et al, 2000).  Similarly, continuous heading detection was investigated using a compensatory task such that perceived heading was measured with respect to a remembered target (Sargent et al, 2008).  These applied studies are useful and give insightful information about motion perception in realistic contexts.  There is a need for more psychophysical SD motion perception studies using an ergonomics approach, where the results can be generalized and directly used in the field of aviation. 


% 4) Proposal of work (put all one paragraph in the final text)

In this study, we investigate SD by using : 1) motion perception experimental methods to create a generalized SD occurence dataset containing a perceptual feedback measure, 2) statistical and ML methods to identify optimal modeling parameters for predicting SD.  

During the dataset creation phase, we used existing motion detection experimental design methodologies, and designed a generalized motion detection experiment for quantifying SD in a flight context.  A vestibular whole-body compensatory tracking task in darkness was used to produce realistic motion cues that a pilot might experience, where motion detection behavior was recorded via joystick movements.  Two experiments were conducted, a rotational and translational motion detection task.  The rotational and translational experiments administered angular and linear whole-body stimulation, around and along the 3 Cartesian coordinate frame axes, respectively.  Participants were given randomized combinations of three parameters that created the angular or linear motion stimuli: axis, direction along the axis, and speed.  Similar to recent motion perception experimentation a motion simulation system was used to administer whole-body stimulation.  The goal of the work in phase 1 was to create a realistic and diverse dataset of perceptual joystick motion with respect to the occurrence of SD.  The motivation of the dataset creation phase was not to identify vestibular thresholds and report corresponding behavior, but to recreate realistic flight response data in a controlled manner such that states of disorientation could be modeled.  It was necessary to first recreate a motion detection experiment based on previous research before SD could be investigated and modeled, because there were no public datasets of a naturalistic piloting task that denoted the occurrence of SD and containing a perceptual feedback measure.  Despite the advent of public datasets, such as Google Cloud and Kaggle, psychophysical experimental data for a specific context are rare or unavailable.

During the comprehensive ML modeling parameter search phase, we 1) categorized participant response into 4 profiles, 2) created 3 semi-supervised labels from the profiles for identifying SD-state, 3) created 6 unique features from the perceptual joystick feedback measure, 4) compared test set prediction accuracy and ROC-AUC for five key modeling parameters: number of features, 8 model types, dataset conditions, feature type, semi-supervised label type.  Machine learning modeling parameter combinations were identified for accurate prediction of SD.  The goal of phase 2 was to create a machine learning model parameter selection guide for SD prediction, such that SD researchers in aviation can readily use these proven parameters with real flight data.

Finally, the relationship between physical sickness symptoms and motion disorientation were investigated to identify potential physical markers for SD; physical sickness was quantified using a generalized disorientation test for humans called the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) (Kennedy et al, 1993; Bouchard et al, 2007).  We hypothesized that participants who correctly detected motion, implying they do not have SD, will additionally not have physical sickness.